Fundamentals Of Communication 
-------------------------------------

‘Most of the successful people I’ve known are the ones who do more listening than talking' ---> Bernard Baruch
‘When you talk, you are only repeating what you already know. But if you listen, you may learn something new’  --> Dalai Lama
'The most important thing in communication is to hear what isn’t being said’. ---> Peter F. Drucker
‘You can have brilliant ideas, but if you can’t get them across, your ideas won’t get you anywhere’. --> Lee Iacocca
`A professional writer is an amateur who didn’t quit’. --> Richard Bach
‘It usually takes me more than three weeks to prepare a good impromptu speech’. --> Mark Twain

It involves interpersonal communication, business communication, and informative communication.

Module 1 - Interpersonal Communication

Interpersonal communication is an exchange between two or more people. This term is used in a work context and is known as a soft skill.

Active listening means consciously blocking visual or audible distractions when someone is speaking either over the phone, face to face or over webinar conference.

Consultation is a formal term for the act of seeking out advice or input from others with regard to an activity or task that you have responsibility for completing.

Giving and receiving feedback is something that people do daily in order to progress work or tasks according to business requirements.

1. Interpersonal Communication
Some interpersonal communication behaviours - 
1. Active listening  
 - Simply Paying Attention
 - Focusing on what you are being told
 - Actively blocking out other voices or noises
2. Verbal Cues 
 - Tone
 - Volume 
 - Pitch 
 - Pace
3. Confirmation 
4. Clarifying
5. Feedback
6. Non-verbal Cues

2. Active Listening 
Active listening means you have to concentrate, understand, respond and recall what the other person is saying.

Focus your attention on the person communicating
Show empathy by trying to imagine yourself in the person’s shoes
Paraphrase to show understanding and provide feedback (e.g. ‘so what you are saying is…’)
Use non-verbal cues to show understanding (e.g. nodding, eye contact and leaning forward)
Acknowledge what they are saying at intervals (e.g. ‘I see’, ‘I know’, ‘Sure’ or ‘I understand’)
Don't reveal your response too early and allow them to finish

Consultation - 
It’s an opportunity to add value to the decision-making process by:

Asking questions
Raising concerns and reporting any problems
Making recommendations
Being part of the problem-solving process

Consultation techniques - 
1. Team meetings
2. Group email
3. Surveys
4. Focus groups

4. Giving and receiving feedbacks - 
A popular tool that you can use to provide feedback is the Situation, Behaviour and Impact (SBI) model.
The SBI model (created by the Center for Creative Leadership) uses a simple framework
Situation - explain the circumstances of the event
Behaviour - explain the behaviours as they were witnessed or reported by others
Impact - explain what happened as a result of the behaviour.

Few techniques to incorporate when giving effective feedback - 
1. Be specific
2. Be prescriptive
3. Be positive
4. Tell the whole story
5. Be professional

Module - 2 Business Communication 

Business communication is the formal process of communication in a work setting. The exchanges are based on business tasks and directly linked to your role in the company.

Guidelines are created to maintain a standard of communication that all people in the business understand and they help to refine communication methods.

Grammatical accuracy means a sentence structure with accurate spelling that results in a high standard, which is expected in all workplaces.

Topics are 
1. Writing styles
2. Guidelines
3. Grammar
4. Emails and letters

1. Writing Styles - 
1. Expository - This is when you explain something in text. It is best used if you want to create ‘how-to’ communication with facts and figures. It contains no emotive claims or personal reflections.

Examples: policies and technical manuals.


2. Descriptive - We often describe circumstances and events in both our work and personal lives. The key here is to use the right ‘type’ of adjective for the right circumstance.

Example: describing the sun as ‘cheerfully bright’ might be fine for a piece of poetry but highlighting the dangers of the ‘hot Australian’ sun in a Work Health and Safety presentation is more suitable.

3. Persuasive
Here you are convincing others to think as you think. In a business context, we will write persuasive communication regularly to our customers and stakeholders. We also use a persuasive writing style when we deliver oral, video or in-person presentations

Examples: newspapers, advertisements, academic essays, emails and letters (both personal and professional).

4. Narrative - 
This is when you are telling a story and is not often used in a business setting.

Examples: business cases, writing a pitch to a brief or capturing details of a workplace dispute.

Advantages and disadvantages of written communication

Advantages

Easy to preserve
Permanent record
An effective way of presenting complex material
Reduces distortion of information or misinterpretation

Disadvantages

Time-consuming
Delay in response and decision making
Lack of flexibility
Difficult to build rapport with others

2. Guidelines -
Clear writing guidelines help businesses avoid slang and texting lingo that many younger workers are using daily.
Procedure - 
 - Adjust tone to audience
 - Get to the point
 - Remember the message purpose
 - Avoid jargon and Cliches
 - Review and edit your work

3. Grammatical accuracy - 
To ensure we are technically correct in our sentence structure
Six tips - 
1. Be careful with commas
2. Make sure you use consistent verb tenses
3. Watch out for homophones
4. Use capitalisation purposefully 
5. Learn important abbrevations and acronyms.
6. Use active, rather than passive, voice

4. Writing Emails and Letters - 
 - Subject Line --> Persuasive and Concise Subject lines work best
 - Opener --> Include a quick greeting to acknowledge the reader
 - Body 
 - Spelling and Grammar
 - Length --> Keep it as concise as possible to minimise the risk of the reader skimming through your message
 - Closing 
 - Avoid emojis in professional emails.

Common types of formal letters - 
1. Making a complaint
2. Making a request
3. Applying for a job
4. Putting forward a business proposal
5. Sending a formal invitation.

Format for formal letters - 
 - Your Contact Information 
 - The date
 - An appropriate greeting
 - Body of the letter
 - A closing sign-off
 - Signature

5. Activities - 
If you write emails well, and writing emails is something you currently do in the workplace

Informative communication is created to pass on facts or educate others on a particular topic or issue.

Effective presentations are presentations delivered with purpose either verbally or pre-recorded video and incorporate a visual representation of the message.

Audiovisual is the term for tools or aids used by a presenter to make their presentation engaging and help share the message in a clear and easy to understand way.

Information sourcing is how we build our knowledge about a topic and this can come from individuals or through online research.


1. Effective Presentations - 
 - Avoid just reading the text
 - Use short sentences 
 - Vary your tone of voice
 - Be conscious of your pace
 - Make eye contact and smile when possible 
 - Monitor your audience's level of interest 
 - Be passionate and emotive
 - Keep your presentation slides simple 
 - Dress for the occasion and most importantly 
 - Practice, practice, practice!

When preparing a written presentation, consider the following. 
1. Resource your topic
2. Take the time to plan your content
3. Choose a presentation design

2. Information Sourcing - 
Since not all the information on the Internet is factual, it is necessary to consider the following questions when determining the reliability or credibility of a source. 
Date, Known Source, Author, Multiple Sources

Use unique search terms:

Try different words
Type in words that are more specific to the subject
For example: If you are researching for training, you could refine the result by including – ‘technical’, ‘professional’ or ‘presentation’

Use natural language:

Try asking a question
Type your question as you would verbally ask it
For example: Type in ‘what are audio visual tools?’

Drop suffixes:

Try using only the base of a word for your search
Type the shorter version
For example: Type ‘consult’ instead of ‘consulting’ or ‘consultation’

3. Activities - 
Seven Deadly Speaking Skills - 
1. Gossiping
2. Judging
3. Negativity
4. Complaining
5. Excuses
6. Lying    --> Penultimate, embroidery, exaggeration
7. Dogmatism

HAIL --> To greet or acclaim enthusiastically
H = Honesty be clear and straight
A = Authenticity be yourself
I = Integrity be your word
L = Love wish them well
